Hello and welcome to session 409,
I/O Technologies,
Best Practices for Driver Development.
We will be talking to you today,
we'll have four speakers today
talking about four different
areas of driver development,
so let's get started.
Here are the four speakers and
the areas we will be discussing.
My name is Rhoaads Hollowell.
I'm with the USB software team,
the USB technology team,
and I'll be talking about
what's new with USB.
So the main issue that we have,
or the main thing that's
new with USB these days,
of course, is that we've now switched
to the Intel I/O chipsets
in all of our products,
which means we have two
different USB controllers
than we've had historically.
We have Intel's high-speed controller,
or their EHCI controller,
and we have Intel's
full-speed controller,
the UHCI controller.
We also, new with the Mac Pro,
have 64-bit systems that are slightly
different than historical 64-bit systems,
and so I'll talk a little bit about that.
First of all, I want to talk about the
Intel EHCI controller,
their new high-speed controller.
The use of this controller should be
completely transparent to both driver
writers and device manufacturers.
The existing Apple USB/EHCI controller
driver that we've had for quite
a number of years now works great
with this new Intel architecture.
Things that we've seen that might
affect driver writers slightly is,
for example, in isochronous I/O,
you may not be able to send out
isochronous data packets in frames that
are too close to the current frame.
That number has always been an issue
with isochronous driver writers.
The number may be two
milliseconds into the future,
it may be four milliseconds
into the future,
so your driver just has to
be aware that when it begins
an isochronous data stream,
the first so many frames may
or may not go out on the bus,
and you should be able to deal
with that without any issues.
Other than that,
there are very few issues that
we've seen with drivers that,
you know, some slight timing issues as
far as how much data can go in a
millisecond and that kind of thing.
The Intel Full Speed Controller,
the UHCI controller, is also new to us.
And although this particular
controller has been around at
Intel for quite a long time,
the Apple Mac OS X driver for the
UHCI controller is fairly new.
We started shipping this driver
in 2005 with pre-Intel systems
to support UHCI PCI cards,
and now with the Intel systems,
we of course have to support
it in all of the new hardware.
One of the issues that driver writers
might see is that you might get slightly
different error messages returned
than you did in the old OHCI days.
This comes from the fact that the
UHCI controller gives the system
software different information
than an OHCI controller does,
and so we may end up taking that
information and we do our best to map it
to the same types of error messages in
the case of errors as we did with OHCI,
but this is not always possible
because we don't always have
the same amount of information.
Now another issue that affects
people with the UHCI controller
is that the UHCI controller,
unlike an OHCI controller
or an EHCI controller,
is not allowed to have a data buffer
for any packet across a page boundary.
So this means that, for example,
if the max packet size
of a device is 64 bytes,
which is typical,
and a particular 64 byte data
packet would cross a page boundary,
then the system software has to
actually copy that 64 bytes before
it DMAs it to the controller,
or before it gives the DMA address
to the controller for sending
or receiving the data buffer.
Now the host controller driver
handles this type of thing
transparently for your driver.
You should not have to
deal with it at all.
You shouldn't even know it's happening.
What this does mean is that you may
not change the data in your data
buffer after making the I/O call
and before that call returns.
So, for example,
if you have an outgoing I/O packet
or an outgoing I/O buffer and
you were sort of cheating,
if you will,
and filling in the data closer to
the time you expected it to go out,
that's no longer acceptable.
If you are sort of cheating
and looking at a data buffer,
expecting data to come in,
it may or may not all be
there when you expect it to,
because we may have to be copying the
64 byte data packet behind your back.
So don't change the data in the
buffer after you make the I/O call.
Now, for low-latency isochronous N,
where we do have people that
sort of expect to be able to see
their data in a real-time thread
before they get the callback,
we do copy the data before we
update the status in the frame,
in the isochronous frame structure.
And so that is still the case.
If you wait until that isochronous
frame structure status is updated
before you look at the data,
those data bytes will be, in fact,
there when you look at them.
64-bit system support.
Now, even though the kernel is a 32-bit
task and your kernel extension,
if you have a USB driver
that's a kernel extension,
is also a 32-bit task,
it may be running on a 64-bit system
where the memory buffer itself is mapped
into a physical memory space that is
greater than a 32-bit address can handle.
The EHCI controller is
able to handle these data,
these physical memory addresses,
these 64-bit memory addresses,
transparently,
completely capable of doing 64-bit DMA.
So that's not a problem.
However,
both the UHCI and the OHCI controllers
are not capable of handling more than
32 bits of physical address space.
So in this situation,
the host controller driver,
the I/O USB family software,
will see that that's the case and
will end up copying the data buffer.
The I/O Kit is a new feature that
allows you to change the driver's data
before or after the I/O as appropriate.
So again,
what this means is your driver should
not change the data in the data
buffer while the I/O is in flight.
This is a case where low latency
isochronous does need to pay attention
because our low latency API gives
you the ability to look at your data
once we've updated the frame status.
And of course,
that's going to be very difficult
if the data is in 64-bit memory,
the physical address is 64 bits,
and we have to do the copying.
So what we've done is we've added a new
API for those of you who are doing low
latency isochronous in transactions.
And it's called
GetLowLatencyOptionsAndPhysicalMask.
This allows you to retrieve a physical
mask for use with I/O Kit's new call in
task with physical mask that will say,
"Hey, I want to make sure that my data
buffer is allocated in physical memory
whose address is lower than 32 bits."
It also allows you to
retrieve option bits.
The only one that is actually
relevant in this case is physically
contiguous because on some controllers,
for example, the UHCI controller,
you also want to allocate your
memory as physical contiguous.
We had a property-based mechanism
for doing that in the past,
and we've now rolled that into the
same API so that you can just with this
one call retrieve from the controller
the option bits and physical mask that
is necessary for that controller to
function properly for low-latency,
isochronous input buffers.
And I will now turn it over to Rob,
who will talk about HID Manager.
Thanks, Rhoaads.
I'm Rob Yepez with the I/O Kit team,
and I'm primarily responsible
for the HID Manager in Mac OS X.
Today I'm just going to talk
about what's new in HID,
create a new HID Manager API,
and talk a little bit about the 64-bit
support that we've added in Leopard.
So first off,
I'll start by discussing the past issues
that we've had with the HID Manager.
The old API used the
CFPlugin architecture,
which was a little bit confusing
for some of our developers.
It also required a working
knowledge of the I/O Kit APIs,
and you need to use these APIs for
device discovery and removal and whatnot.
It also required the developers to
manage all aspects of the HID objects.
So you had to basically take
care of storing them and
keeping track of everything
associated with the HID objects,
such as the transactions, the queues,
the elements, whatever.
And the other past issue we've
had is the inconsistencies with
acquiring the device properties.
With some properties,
you'd get them from the plugin,
and other properties you'd
get from the I/O registry.
So we're kind of trying to
centralize that in the newer API.
And also, the way we pass the HID events
is a little confusing.
We use the really big,
massive structure to pass the events
that sometimes either had a 32-bit
value or a data value on there.
And it was kind of hard to decipher
what value was actually being
passed in that particular event.
So here's the new HID Manager API.
What we've done here is we've pretty
much based the API on CF-type objects.
And what we gain for free here is
reference counting and the ability to
store these in CF collection objects.
The new objects that we've
created are the I/O HID Manager,
I/O HID Element, and the I/O HID Value.
We also have newer versions of
the old APIs we had in the past,
so I/O HID Device, I/O HID Queue,
and I/O HID Transaction.
The advantage of doing all this work
is we're able to clean up the API a
little bit and shield the developer
from using any unnecessary APIs.
So this kind of gives you a brief
layout of the new HitManager API.
And what you see here is the first
thing you'd really want to talk
to you is the I/O HitManager.
And then if you really need to,
you can talk to the
I/O HitDevice and I/O HitElement,
but they're not really required.
And of course,
the optional objects here are the
I/O HitQueue and the I/O HitTransaction.
So let's talk about the I/O Hit Manager.
This is an entirely
new object in Leopard.
And what this does is it
handles most aspects of your
device and queue management.
So it will do everything for you.
Kind of nice global interaction
with your Hit devices.
So this is your single endpoint to
communicate with all your devices.
And what this does is it
sets up your device discovery
and receiving input events.
So what we've done here is you can
start beginning to receive input
events in only five API methods.
This is kind of a brief example
of how to use the I/O Hit Manager.
What we're doing here is we
first create the I/O Hit Manager.
We don't have any options yet,
but we will in the future.
And after you've created the Hit Manager,
we go ahead and open the
Hit Manager for communication.
What we do here is you can also pass
the KIOHitOptionsSees option bit here,
and this will give you exclusive
access to the devices that
you're communicating with.
So if you wanted to seize the mouse
or the keyboard from the system.
After you've opened the HID Manager,
let's go ahead and set up a matching
dictionary for the devices that we're
actually interested in talking to.
For this example,
we're going to try to register
interest in joysticks.
So what we do is we create the
matching dictionary using CFDictionary,
create mutable.
Go ahead and set up the CFNumbers for
the usage page and usage.
In this case,
the usage page is generic desktop.
The usage is joystick.
Once we've done that,
we go ahead and set the
values into the dictionary.
And after we've done that,
we make a call to I/O Hit Manager,
Set Device Matching.
Now,
if we're interested in multiple devices,
we can use I/O Hit Manager,
Set Device Matching Multiple.
And what that does is it takes
in a CFArray of CFDictionary's.
And so you can use that to set up
interest in multiple device types.
So after we've done that,
let's go ahead and register a
callback for device matching.
And so this is a callback that's
used to notify us any time a device
matching our profile enters the system.
We also register the
input value callback,
and this is for the events that
are being received from the device.
And let's go ahead and schedule
this with the run loop.
And in this example,
we're just using the current
run loop with the default mode.
And if you look at the end,
we're calling CF run loop run.
This may not be necessary in
Cocoa or Carbon applications,
But if you're doing a regular task,
this might be useful for you.
And for the input value callback,
we just receive the event here.
We're just checking to
see if it's not null,
and we go ahead and call processValue.
And this is a method we'll discuss a
little bit later in the presentation.
The next object is I/O Hit Device,
and this is basically a newer version
of the old API we had in the past,
not really required.
And what this does is it provides you
similar functionality to the older API,
so you can use this to set and get
element values and obtain input
reports and set and get reports.
We've also added
additional functionality.
We allow you to kind of store your
own application-specific properties,
and this is useful for
you to maintain states.
Instead of having to create
objects that wrap around this,
you can just use this object directly.
We also allow you to set up and
register for simple input events.
And so what this does is
eliminates the need for you
to use a queue in most cases.
Now we do limit the objects that
we enqueue here to those that are
smaller than or the size of CFindex.
And from previous presentations,
CFindex is either 32 bits
or 64 bits depending on what
architecture you're compiling for.
Now, there are some issues that you need
to watch out for with I/O Kit device.
First of which,
the differences between input
report callback and get report.
Now, you'd use the input report
callback to get interrupt-driven
input reports from the device.
I/O Kit device get report
can be used as well,
but this issues control requests
for a particular report.
The thing you've got to watch
out for is that this should
be supported by a device,
but we've seen in the past is that
reported calls to the device for
an input report via get report
sometimes results in a stalled pipe.
So you might want to defer to using
the callback mechanism instead to
kind of avoid that from happening.
Another thing is you need to
be making use of I/O Kit device
copy matching elements.
And what this does is--
Basically gives you all the elements
of interest in the particular device.
Previously, what you had to do was parse
through the elements by
grabbing them from the registry.
And depending on the number of
elements that were available on the
devices can be potentially expensive,
because what you had to do was serialize
the elements on the kernel side and then
un-serialize them back on the user side.
And this pretty much locked up
your application for a little bit.
Also, beginning in 10.4,
not all the elements were
accessible from the registry.
And we did that on purpose basically
to kind of minimize the amount
of time it took to actually grab
the elements from the registry.
So a new object that we've
added is I/O Hit Element.
And what this does is it replaces
the old CFDictionary representation
we had in the past.
So it just provides you
convenient accessors to get
at all the element properties.
Like I/O Hit Device,
it allows you to store and obtain
application-specific properties.
So of course if you wanted to save any
kind of state or maybe potentially have
action IDs associated with each element,
you can do so here.
We've also added the ability
to have calibration settings.
So what we can do is
support calibration bounds,
the granularity, the dead zone,
and the saturation.
And we'll show you a little
example of how we do that here.
So this kind of gives you a layout of
how the calibration could be set up.
See, we have the saturation points and
the dead zone in the saturation.
So, just to give you kind of
a brief example of how to
actually set up the calibration.
So, what we do first here is we try to
look for the x-axis of the joystick.
So, we go ahead and set up
our matching dictionary.
And we've already prepared the
usage page and usage CFNumbers here.
So, we're looking at the generic
desktop and usage for the x-axis.
Now that we've done that,
we go ahead and call I/O HitDevice
Copy Matching Element.
And what that does is it
returns back a CFArray.
We see if it's not null,
it's got at least one object inside here.
So let's just go ahead and
grab the first element.
Now that we've done that,
just go ahead and set
the properties on there.
And what we're doing is we're
setting the property for the
calibration bin and the max.
In this example,
just negative one and one.
And for the granularity,
just go ahead and set that to one.
Now let's set the saturation
points and dead zone for
the joystick and the X-axis.
So now another object that we
have here is I/O Hit Value.
And this is a new object, of course,
in Leopard.
And what this does is it provides
accessors to obtain the integer
or data representation of a value.
So it's more of opaque calls
as opposed to looking at the
structure like we did in the past.
You can get the scale representation
of an element value as well.
And this is useful for getting
either the physical value of the
element or the calibrated value.
And like I said earlier,
it replaces the confusing
I/O Hit that we had in the past.
Just to kind of give you an idea of what
the previous structure looked like here,
it's like basically an event
struct that had about six fields.
And the confusing thing here is that
you had both a value that was 32 bits,
but then the ability to be passing
data values in there with the long
value and the long value size.
And sometimes it was a little annoying
to kind of decipher which value
was actually in this structure.
So we kind of just shielded you
for that with I/O Hit Value.
So here's an example of
how to use I/O Kit value.
What we're doing here is,
like the method we mentioned earlier,
process value.
Let's go ahead and deal with the
value that's being passed to us.
First thing we do here is we go
ahead and get the element that's
associated with that value.
After we've done that,
we go ahead and obtain the usage
page and usage for that value.
In this example,
we're only interested in the X axis,
so we go ahead and look for that.
Once we've found that element,
let's go ahead and get the scaled value.
And in this one, we're only interested in
the type that's calibrated.
And just simple, greater than zero,
move right, less than zero, move left.
Pretty straightforward.
Another object in the head
manager is ioHit::queue.
And this is strictly optional.
You don't really need
to make use of this.
But it's useful for queuing
input type element values.
And, like the older API,
it gives you the ability to
specify the queue depth and
manually dequeue element values.
This is useful for
queuing complex elements,
such as those that are greater
than the size of CF index,
and also for handling duplicate elements.
And those are the elements
that have one use tied to a
multiple report current element.
Unless you really need
to make use of this API,
I would defer to using
I/O Hit Manager Register Input
Value Callback or
I/O Hit Device Register Input
Value Callback,
as that will handle
that properly for you.
Now, issues with using the
I/O Kit device queue.
There's a difference between absolute
and relative elements in the way
that they're handled on the queue.
Absolute element values that do
not differ will not be enqueued.
So if you're looking for
that kind of behavior,
you might want to defer to
using the input value call-- or,
sorry, the input report callback.
Also, relative element values,
just because of their nature,
will always be enqueued.
Also, when you're using the
I/O Kit Q register value callback,
you need to make notice that the
callback will only be issued when the
queue transitions to being non-empty.
So what this means is that
when the callback is issued for
your particular application,
you need to make sure to
drain the queue completely.
Otherwise, you will not continue to
receive any callbacks.
This is an example of
how to do such a thing.
So here we've got the queue callback.
And what we're doing here is
we're looping until we run out
of values that are passed with
I/O Hit Queue Copy Next Value.
And what that does is dequeues
the values from the queue.
Because it is a copy,
you do need to make sure that
you CF release the value ref
after you're complete with it.
Next object here is I/O Kit Transaction.
And this is useful for manipulating
multiple feature output type elements.
Basically, we'll limit the amount of
communication to the device,
so instead of individually calling set
element value or get element value,
you can kind of group them together
and then use one transaction.
Another thing you want to do is use
report IDs to kind of group these
together and still make sure only
one report is issued to the device.
New support that we've added
in Leopard is the ability to
have bidirectional support.
In the past,
we only supported output transactions,
so now we can set up input as well,
so this is useful for
feature type elements to,
you know,
obtain the state of a particular element.
As with the older API,
we allow the ability
to set default values,
and that's pretty useful
for the output transaction.
and I'll briefly cover the 64-bit
support that we've added to Leopard.
Both the current and new HitManager
API is 64-bit compatible.
One thing we've changed here
is I/O HitElementCookie.
The type changes from void star
to UN32 when you're building LP64.
And this is done just for
compatibility reasons,
not anything you really
notice on your end.
And as we covered before in the past,
the new API makes use
of CFNX and like I said,
32-bits or 64-bits depending on what is
native architecture you're compiling for.
And with that, I'll go ahead and pass
this on to Ethan Bold.
I'm Ethan Bold, and like Rob,
I work on the I/O Kit team,
and today we're going to talk a
little bit about some best practices
for driver power management.
So why do you need to
power manage your driver?
Because most of the computers that
Apple sells today are laptops.
And if your driver is going to be for
a PC card or any kind of PCI device,
you need to have a power
management-aware driver.
And it's very easy.
Your driver probably only needs to be
able to power itself on and off when the
machine is going to sleep and waking up.
So today--
So today I want to familiarize you
with OS X's power management support
and discuss how you can add that to
your internal I/O service-based driver.
So who needs the APIs I'm going
to be talking about today?
You don't need them if you have
a user space driver of any kind.
User space, USB, or FireWire doesn't need
to implement these APIs.
If you have an in-kernel driver whose
family already supports power management,
then you don't need to
implement these APIs either.
For example,
the I/O networking family has good
built-in support for power management.
So if you're subclassing
I/O Ethernet interface,
you don't need to use any of these APIs.
So the calls I'm about to talk about
are for in-kernel drivers that directly
subclass I/O service or subclass a family
that doesn't offer that power management.
So your driver's role in power
managing your device is to,
first and foremost,
power the device off while the
machine goes to sleep and power
it back on during wake from sleep.
And beyond that,
you need to save the state
of your hardware to memory.
[Transcript missing]
One of the big gotchas with sleep is
that user space threads and processes
are still running while we're putting
the machine to sleep and while we're
turning your device to power off.
So your device could be deluged
with dozens of hardware accesses
after it's already turned off.
So you need a strategy for preventing
those from actually trying to touch
the hardware and panic the system.
A good approach is the I/O work
loop based approach where you block
all incoming threads with a close
gate call and then those threads
can safely resume on wake from sleep
and complete their I/O accesses.
And to your driver,
all kinds of sleep will appear the same.
You'll get the same
types of notifications.
Be it idle sleep, or late closed sleep,
or even safe sleep, or hibernation.
So there are three pretty simple calls to
sign up your device for power management.
And there's one cleanup
call you need to make.
And we're also going to talk
about one I/O service method you
need to override to get those
power management notifications.
So the first call you need to
make to register your driver
for power management is PMINIT.
And that just allocates some internal
power management data structures.
The second call that you
need to make is join PMTree.
And this tells the kernel power
management where your device needs
to belong in the I/O power plane.
And the I/O power plane is how
we order sleep/wake across all
of the devices in the system.
For instance, the I/O power plane kind
of looks like a tree.
And the leaf nodes are always the first
to be slept and the last to be woken.
And only after all of a node's
children have been put to sleep will
that parent node be put to sleep.
So here's an example of that.
This is an example of the
I/O Power Plan that I took
off of a MacBook Pro,
and you can pull this off of
any of your own laptops just
by running ioreg-p iopower.
And if you're familiar
with the I/O Registry,
this is just another facet of
the I/O Registry that tracks
these power dependencies.
And in this example,
you can see Airport at the
very bottom of the hierarchy,
and its direct parent is
an I/O Power connection,
which we can ignore.
And above that is the PCI nub
that it is attached to,
and above that is the PCI bus
that it's connected to.
So when the machine is going to sleep,
Airport will always be told
to power off first before the
PCI bus that it's attached to.
The last step in signing up for power
management is to define a couple of
power states in an array and pass
those into kernel power management.
So we're starting here by defining
an array of two power states.
Each power state is defined by
the struct IOPM_POWER_STATE,
and you can find the definition
for that in IOPM_POWER_STATE.h
in the kernel framework.
But you can see here that
at index 0 of the array,
we're defining our off state,
and at index 1,
we're defining our on state.
So when the system goes to sleep,
we'll be told to go into this off state,
and when the system wakes,
we'll be told to go into this on state.
And we're only setting
three important fields here:
this capability flags,
output power character,
and input power requirement.
And for our off state,
we're setting them all to 0.
And for the on state,
we're going to set them all to 1.
And here's some shorthand
for setting that struct up,
that array of structs.
And this is how you're more
likely to see these power states
defined in any Apple driver code.
And next, all we have to do is call the
I/O service method registerPowerDriver
with a pointer to ourselves,
or this pointer, because we are our own
power controlling driver,
a pointer to the array of two
power states we just defined,
and the number two,
because we have two power states.
So, remember we had to call pm init,
and then join pmtree,
and then registerPowerDriver,
in that order,
and you typically do that in
your driver start routine.
Now when your driver unloads for when
your device disappears for any reason,
you just need to call PM Stop to
clean up for all three of
those PM initialization calls.
Okay, and the last step is to override
the I/O Service Virtual Method set
power state.
Set power state takes an
unsigned long argument,
power state ordinal,
and that's the important
argument to watch here.
So that number tells you which
index into your power state array
you need to transition into.
So here's some example code.
You can see here that
If the unsigned long which
state argument is set to zero,
then we're going to sleep
and we need to take action to
save state of our hardware,
prevent any incoming hardware accesses,
and turn our device off.
And otherwise,
we are waking up and we need to power
our hardware back on and allow any
blocked hardware accesses to proceed.
And there's a couple of interesting
lines down at the bottom.
You can--there are two
return codes you can make.
You can return I/O PM ACK implied,
which means that you have
completely powered your hardware
off or on in this method,
and you're done.
Your hardware is completely powered off.
Or you can return I/O PM will ACK later,
and that means that you are finishing
your hardware work asynchronously.
And you will acknowledge later with
the call Acknowledge Set Power State.
So, it can be very painful to debug power
management problems and sleep-wake issues
because a lot of the debugging facilities
that we rely on aren't there when the
machine is going to sleep or waking up.
So, the display can be powered off,
Ethernet can be powered off,
and hard disks can be spun down.
So, all those facilities that
we rely on aren't available.
But luckily, unless you're working on a
FireWire driver of some sort,
you can load up a FireWire logging kex
that lets you do printf-style logging
from your machine to a second computer.
And you can get logs all the way down to
the point that the CPUs are turned off.
So, it's a very, very useful tool.
And we also have a... Oh,
and the FireWire kprintf debugging is
available in the FireWire SDKs today.
So there's also a tool called
SleepX that I'll point you to.
And SleepX just lets you stress driver
sleep/wake in your driver by sleeping
and waking the entire system dozens
or hundreds or thousands of times.
And you can catch leaks and
races and all sorts of stuff.
And that is probably not available today,
but should be available from DTS soon.
So that's about it for me.
There are a few gotchas with
Sleep/Wake that I'd like to mention.
One is you can't allocate memory
on the sleep path because a memory
allocation could require VM to
page out some user space memory,
but if the disks are already spun down,
you'll create a deadlock
and the system will hang.
I should mention that
these APIs won't give you a
notification at system shutdown.
And I should also note that this was a
pretty simple run-through of a simple
way to do device power management,
but it gets considerably more
complicated to do any higher
levels of power management.
So, thank you.
That's it for me.
And Eric Anderson's up.
Okay, thanks Ethan.
Hi everybody.
To round out this morning's presentation,
we're going to talk about
best practices in FireWire.
A lot of the same general concepts
as you heard for the other
I/Os from a FireWire point of view.
First, what's new?
We spent the past year pretty
much changing everything,
hopefully in order to change nothing.
We believe on the Intel platforms
we have total feature parity with
the PowerPC platforms before them.
Everything should work.
We have our SDK 22 that
Ethan just mentioned,
which has the FireWire
kprintf service in it.
That's available at the
URL you can see there.
That's already up.
That's been up for a
couple months actually.
Everything in there is
100% universal source code,
sample code,
and the tools that are in there
are just about 100% universal.
I should note,
unlike the transition a few years
ago from Mac OS 9 to Mac OS X,
where we sort of dropped FireWire
out of the classic environment,
FireWire is fully supported in Rosetta.
You can use the PowerPC applications
from SDK 22 or 21 even,
and they will all work
fine on the Intel systems.
Of course, we encourage you to go native.
We've done everything we can
to support that with full
parity and full source code.
But if you do need to
run in Rosetta because,
say, you're a plug-in to an app
that itself is not native,
you can do that.
FireWire services are
completely available,
and they should work fine.
Two other new areas that I'm going
to discuss this morning are 64-bit
support for the new Mac Pro and
some new sample code that we have
for audio/video type devices.
So like you heard a little earlier,
the Mac Pro has a 64-bit architecture.
It can have more than 4
gigabytes of system memory.
The OHCI FireWire controller that we use
today is limited to working within the
first 4GB of memory by its architecture.
So if you are working from
user space through FireWire,
through our user clients for example,
or through higher level APIs,
you're fine.
Your buffers and user space can
be remapped so that the physical
page underneath them moves into
the low 4GB where FireWire can
see that page with its DMA.
So you don't need to worry about that.
On the other hand, if you're developing a
kernel driver for FireWire,
because we're a high performance I/O,
we don't want to be copying your data all
over the place just to get it in and out.
So we require that you allocate
these buffers below 4GB if
necessary on these systems so that
the DMA can touch them directly.
Now there's two kinds of
buffers in FireWire that you
may need to be concerned with.
For ordinary buffers in memory
that you're simply going to
run an isochronous program,
to transmit or receive,
or the basic FWREAD, FWWRIGHT calls.
These are handled by the
first block of code here.
There are APIs to simply find out
the mask or the number of bits
that's supported by the controller
that's backing up your object.
Today these will all return
either 32 or that constant that
you see with 32 ones in it.
Conceivably, in the future,
you may run into the
need for a different API.
FireWire allows external devices to
access the memory in the computer
directly through the FireWire hardware
with no software intervention at all.
The FireWire specification carves
out a range of memory addresses
in which this can be done.
That range is actually 48 bits large.
So, conceivably,
physical memory can be accessed
above 4 gigabytes through a
controller that supports it.
We don't have one yet that does it,
but if you want to be forward-thinking
and take full advantage of a future
controller that did support that,
there's an API for you.
If your buffer is going to be visible
from outside the box through FireWire,
then use this second API,
which in the future could
return a number up to 48.
It can't go above 48.
But if we someday make a mistake,
we can do it.
So, I'm going to show you how to do that.
So, if you have a PC machine
with 256 terabytes,
this will keep you on the
right-hand side of that line where
your stuff will work properly.
So here's a simple example,
just like you saw in the slides before.
Get the FireWire physical buffer mask,
which today will tell you 32 bits of one.
Use InTask with physical mask
and just pass that mask in.
Then it's common in FireWire,
if you're doing isochronous
real-time transfers in or out,
to get one large buffer and carve
it up yourself packet by packet.
So you can simply call getBytesNoCopy
to find out where things are and start
doing pointer arithmetic to build
up your program just like before.
Okay, one other area that is new in
FireWire is a substantial increase
in the amount of sample code for
our audio/video services framework.
There is an MPEG transmitter now that's
constructed using the new DCL service.
New DCL is sort of an abstract
programming language by which
you describe a real-time,
isochronous transfer into or
out of the system on FireWire.
The MPEG transmitter demonstrates
how to use variable length packets.
The previous system only
had fixed length packets.
And even if you're not sending MPEG,
this is probably a good starting
point for any kind of transmit code.
You can just change the packet sizes,
change the loop sizes, the callbacks,
and so on to meet your needs.
Also available is a
new universal receiver.
This is actually a
legacy-style DCL receiver.
We also will have a new
DCL version of this.
This can receive any Isochrone's channel.
It could be DV, it could be MPEG,
it could be iSight, it could be audio,
it could be something that you've
invented for some unique device.
Whatever it is,
this receiver can receive it.
So you can use this as a starting
point to develop your own code to
optimize it to meet your needs,
or you may just want to run it as is.
Many kinds of data that we receive
from FireWire stream according
to the ISO 61883 standard.
So if your data fits in that category,
there's a parser built in that will help
pick it apart and find the appropriate
packets and payload buffers for you.
So why a universal receiver aside from
just its good sample code to start with?
Well, there's two places you might want
to keep the full universal support.
One is there are devices like camcorders
that actually support multiple formats.
They may stream DV at one moment, DV25.
They may turn around and stream MPEG or
HDV the next moment because the user has
moved a switch on the camera or they've
put a different tape in the camera.
Or the tape may even have different
formats recorded on it and it's just
playing back and switching on the fly.
So with the universal receiver,
you don't need to tear down and
build up a receive program every
time you detect a format change.
You can just roll on through
and receive everything.
The other case where you might want this,
even if you don't have
that kind of device,
maybe you have a
multilingual application.
Maybe you've developed some sort
of FireWire video viewer that just
wants to display video from anything.
Here, too, rather than maintaining four
different receive DCLs for four
different packet formats coming in,
just run the universal receiver.
You can pick the bytes out
and decode them yourself,
but now you don't need to tear
it down and maintain it for each
different device that may come along.
All of this will be
available in FireWire SDK 23.
It's at the same URL you saw before.
It's not available yet,
but we do plan to post
it within a few weeks.
One other thing that will
be in there is a tool,
a sample code called AVC Browser.
This replaces an older
version by the same name.
AVC Browser is sort of
like Apple System Profiler,
but for a FireWire device
that uses the AVC protocol,
which would be a camcorder, a television,
a DVHS, whatever.
So you can see the panel on
the left is a list of devices
found on the FireWire bus.
The panel on the right has opened up
one device and is offering controls.
This allows you to sort of poke hands-on,
it's somewhat like Reggie in a sense,
which is a developer tool for reading
and writing memory and other things.
AVC Browser can send primitive
commands to and from your device,
so you can explore to see what
commands the device actually supports,
how it reacts to them,
before you sit down and write code
for doing each of those things and
then trying to debug it on the fly.
So it's a good way to get started with an
unknown device or to become familiar with
the protocol that your device speaks.
Okay, to wrap up,
we have some advice and recommendations
for how to be successful and
effective developing FireWire drivers.
Always start with the
latest FireWire SDK.
There's the URL again,
same one as before.
It is full of sample code, source code,
documentation, tools.
And a lot of the tools are
designed to help you get started
on understanding how things work.
Like AVC Browser specifically lets
you poke around at an AVC device.
We have tools for viewing the
configuration ROM in a FireWire device,
tools for viewing the registers in a PHY,
tools for viewing the bus topology.
So rather than cracking open a 400-page
spec and thousands of lines of API,
you can try these things hands-on,
one by one,
whatever is appropriate to your device,
and get comfortable before
you start writing code.
So then you really feel
you know what you're doing.
If at all possible,
please write in user space.
As I said, we have 100% parity with
our PowerPC services.
We believe 100% of FireWire
is available in user space.
If you find something that's missing,
we will add it.
So it's much easier to
debug in user space.
You can run an Xcode,
you can step through your code,
you can see what's happening,
you don't have to keep rebooting
every time something goes wrong.
It's very preferable.
In the SDK,
most of the sample code that we
provide is for user space projects.
There are a few exceptions.
If we're going to boot
from your FireWire device,
your driver will have
to be in the kernel.
If you've invented some new kind
of RAID we've never seen before,
you may need to write
your own driver for that.
That would have to be in the kernel.
Similarly, a network driver,
if you've got a better internet
protocol or some custom
application-specific thing,
that probably has to go in the
kernel as well so that it can
plug into the networking family.
Finally, search engine.
Finally, certain audio devices,
if you need extremely low latency,
such as for real-time effects processing,
that may need to be in the
kernel as well just to take
advantage of real-time services.
Other than those, we think you should be
able to work in user space.
This really applies to
USB as well as FireWire.
Do not assume that there's
exactly one controller.
The Macs that we sell today have
one FireWire controller built in,
but some of them have slots where the
customer can add another controller.
Some of you are developers for the
cards that would go in those slots,
but it's unfortunate if
your customer buys the card,
adds it to the Mac,
and their plug-in or their driver won't
work on it because someone assumed
there's one and only one FireWire port.
So please test out your drivers on
systems that have an added controller
to make sure you can cope with it.
The same goes for your device.
Of course we want the customer
to buy one of your devices,
but it's even better if the
customer buys two of your devices.
So please make sure that that's going
to work for them by testing on the
system with two or more devices at once.
Usually all it requires is
letting the user choose.
Give them a menu or some kind
of control where they can pick
which device they want to talk to.
A lot of the tools in the
SDK show how to do this.
They have a menu in the upper left corner
that lets you select which FireWire
interface and if applicable which device
or which node they're going to talk to.
Device matching is usually the
first thing someone tackles when
they sit down with a new device
and try to write code for it.
It's a mystery.
You know, you're just getting
started on the project.
As soon as you match to the device,
usually,
do you declare victory and move on
to actually making it do something?
Well, please take care to check
that you haven't matched
too lightly on your device.
Your driver and your device
may work perfectly together,
but if your driver also matches
on someone else's device,
which may be a very
different kind of thing,
it may thrash trying to talk to
that device and getting confused.
So, even though this is usually
done first and then forgotten,
please come back and make sure you
really are matching as tightly as
possible to your device so that you
won't conflict with other things.
FireWire provides a structured
configuration ROM in the device,
which our software discovers.
In there are places for your vendor ID,
your model ID,
and other values that help set
your device apart from others.
So, one of the tools in the
SDK is called Firecracker.
It is a browser for the
configuration ROM in your device.
So, put it in your device.
Plug your device in.
Run Firecracker.
See what sense Firecracker
can make out of your device.
Make sure your unique values, vendor ID,
model ID, and so on are all correct.
If you need some examples for comparison,
Firecracker comes with about eight
built-in devices that you can
pull up from the file menu just to
see what other devices look like.
Finally, this is not a complaint.
We know you all test
your products carefully.
Here's just some tips on how to
test them the most effectively.
As I just described, use Firecracker to
validate your config ROM.
If Firecracker has error messages
or complaints about bad checksums,
there's probably something wrong in
your ROM that you need to clean up.
Another tool in the
SDK is called FireStarter.
It shows the bus topology and some very
low-level information about the bus,
and you can use this to check that
all the bits are correct in the
self-ID packet that your device sends.
There's going to be more detail on
this in this afternoon's session,
session 410.
Another tool built into the SDK,
FWPlug-O-Matic,
electrically connects and disconnects
the FireWire port from your device,
so it can simulate the hot
plugging and hot unplugging
of your device automatically.
This saves wear and
tear on the connector,
saves wear and tear on you,
and helps you check for rare
loading or unloading problems,
memory leaks, and so on.
As I mentioned before,
try two of your devices or more.
Put them on the same bus,
get them active at the same time,
make sure they're really solid
when they're both active.
Like Ethan mentioned, test, sleep, wake.
Often we hear people say, oh,
sleep/wake's not
supported for my product.
There's no explaining
that to the customer.
The product sleeps and wakes.
It's configured out of the box to
fall asleep if you leave it alone.
Do what Ethan said, support sleep/wake.
And test it.
Test it with your device plugged in.
Test it with your device active.
People do things like close the lid in
the middle of copying files or printing,
and your driver can survive that if you
use the right APIs and test it carefully.
On FireWire,
when a device is plugged in or unplugged
or certain changes happen in software,
there's an event called a bus reset.
This is not an error or reason to stop.
It's just an ordinary event.
It happens from time to time.
Nothing bad should happen
when there's a bus reset.
We have two tools in the SDK that
can generate these so that you
can easily test your devices
to make sure they keep working.
FW Busy Bus is really good
at creating bus resets.
It can generate thousands
per second or less.
It's very adjustable.
FW Reset Storm is a little bit gentler,
but maybe a good place to
start for causing bus resets.
Busy Bus has some
additional capabilities,
finally.
You can use this to rapidly
test your device against traffic
that comes in over FireWire.
A simple test would be to just throw
configuration ROM reads at your
device as fast as the tool can do it.
That's much faster than
plugging and unplugging your
device over and over again.
This tool can literally do
thousands of packets per second.
If you have a rare problem
responding to these,
it should pop out pretty quick.
If you can pass that, try a harder test.
Configure the tool to send
junk packets to your device.
This wouldn't happen in practice,
but if you can survive that,
you can probably handle anything the
user is going to throw against you.
It's a powerful tool.
It's in the SDK.
Give it a try.
Finally, please participate.
We have a variety of events and
services to work with developers.
Tonight at the Apple campus,
there's a Plugfest.
It's combined FireWire, USB, and Bonjour.
We'll have a lot of the engineers there,
a lot of the devices,
all the tools I've talked
about will be available.
You can try them out.
There's also something
about a band and free beer,
but come to the Plugfest.
Okay,
we have a public mailing list where we
answer your questions about FireWire,
and even better, you answer each other's
questions about FireWire.
The details are in the SDK,
so you don't have to copy them down here.
And the 1394 Trade Association is
a worldwide organization of
130 companies that all make
some kind of FireWire device.
It's a great resource for
meeting engineers and designers,
people responsible for the standard,
a lot of creative ideas.
They run their own plugfests,
they have quarterly meetings,
technical working groups, mailing lists.
If you're serious about making devices,
you should join the Trade Association and
tap the many services that they offer.
Okay,
if you need more information about any
of the topics that we discussed today,
you can contact Craig Keithley.
He is the technology evangelist
just for I/O in general.
You can also find the documentation,
the sample code, the source code,
and other resources from these
sessions all at the WWDC 2006 site.
Okay, with that I'm going to,
oh I'm sorry, there's one more.
There is a lab tomorrow
morning from 9 to 11,
and there is the beer bash,
I mean plugfest,
that I already mentioned,
and that's tonight back at Apple.